In this paper, they propose a deep learning method for efficient online configuration of RISs aiming to improve the transmitted signal focusing to intended receiver positions in indoor communication environments. A DeepNeural Network(DNN) is designed to learn the mapping between the measured position information at a user location and the optimal configuration of the RIS’s unit cells that maximizes this user’s received signal strength. We construct a fingerprinting database during an offline phase to train the designed DNN, which consists of the measured position information at reference positions and their corresponding optimal RIS configurations. In the online phase, the trained DNN is utilized to predict the optimal tuning of the RIS’s elements given the measured position at the targeted user location. It is shown that the proposed DNN-based approach enables efficient online wireless RIS configuration offering improved signal focusing, and thus increased achievable rates, in desired points in the 3D space with lower estimated errors.

Consider a 3D indoor environment, including one AP equipped with M antenna elements and a RIS comprising of N reflecting elements. We assume that the RIS is also equipped with few active elements that enable estimation of the channels where the RIS is involved. This estimation can take place indirectly via configuration searching or by using sophisticated signal processing algorithms.

We illustrate one Reference Point and two obstacles as an example, but we actually deploy many RPs to collect the fingerprints on a database. All reference points and user locations are assumed on the room’s floor. In the
figure there exists a target user equipped with a wireless device capable of performing estimation of the channel between itself and AP as well as with RIS using classical channel estimation techniques. We assume 3D signal propagation from AP and the RIS reflections, which we will focus by appropriate RIS
configuration on intended user’s position.

Our goal in this paper is to design the optimal RIS configuration in terms of received signal strength maximization at any intended user’s indoor location. Currently, state-of-theart approaches on RIS design assume ideal acquisition of the involved channels h2, H1, and h, and adopt tools from optimization theory. However, at every channel coherence time, the latter approaches require complex operations for RIS configuration which are time and power consuming. To confront this issue, we propose a deep learning method for efficient online (re)configuration of intelligent surfaces. Our method capitalizes on the fact that the optimal phase configuration of the RIS elements for an intended indoor user depends on its position. The objective of the proposed DNN is to compute the mapping between the measured coordinate information of the targeted user and the optimal phase matrix Φ that maximizes this user’s received signal strength. More specifically, the designed DNN-based signal focusing system performs  two operation composed of the following two distinct phases:

Offline (Training) Phase: During this phase, a fingerprinting database is created that includes the measured coordinate information at various reference indoor user positions and their corresponding optimal phase configurations. Φk representing its corresponding optimal phase configuration. We assume that the coordinates at each RP location are computed via highly accurate indoor positioning techniques and the optimal phase matrices are obtained via exhaustive search, or relevant sophisticated techniques . After the creation of the fingerprinting database, its elements are used to train a DNN aiming at unveiling the
relationship between the RPs’ locations and the optimal RIS phase matrices. We assume that the fingerprinting database and DNN are placed on the RIS side; this
requires dedicated storage and computing units to be attached to RIS via adequate interfacing. We further assume that RIS possesses a dedicated receiver for collecting information from RPs and the intended user.

2) Online Phase: During the online phase of the proposed DNN-based method, the intended user first estimates its position’s coordinates which are then communicated to RIS. Upon reception of this information, RIS feeds it to the designed DNN that outputs the required phase matrix for this user location. RIS adopts the computed phase configuration for assisting AP’s transmission, until it receives new position coordinates from the intended user.

Our proposed DNN architecture for the RIS configurations yielding improved indoor signal focusing is illustrated in Fig. 3. It consists of five layers; namely, the input layer, three hidden layers, and the output layer. In particular, there exist multiple neurons in each hidden layer, and each layer’s output is a nonlinear function of a weighted sum of the values of the neurons at the input of this layer. The proposed DNN’s input layer consists of J neurons with values the estimated user position coordinates, which are propagated to the first hidden layer. The role of all three hidden layers is to capture the relationship between the estimation user position information and the optimal RIS phase configuration. Finally, we exploit the output layer to provide the estimation Φˆ for the optimal phase matrix by minimizing the difference between itself and the optimal Φ . In all layers, we have used tanh(·) as our DNN’s activation function σ(·), since it works well with approximations of nonlinear functions and provides full mapping in [−1, 1]. In addition, tanh(·) leads to stronger gradients compared with the sigmoid(·) activation function.

As shown, RIS deployment substantially improves R yielding increased signal focusing at the target user position. The impact of the number RIS reflecting elements N on the RIS configuration using the proposed DNN-based method is demonstrated in Fig. 6. In this figure, the MSE performance between the output RIS phase matrix of the DNN and the optimal phase matrix for a given user position is sketched. It can be seen that the proposed method achieves good performance even for few training epochs for all tested N values. It is also shown that the N = 8 case yields the minimum MSE requiring, however, a few more epochs for convergence compared to the other N values. As intuitively expected, the smaller the N is, the less phase values need to be estimated, hence, the smaller the estimation error becomes.





The guiding principle in communication system design is to decompose signal processing into chains with multiple independent blocks. Each independent block performs a well-defined and isolated function, such as source coding/decoding, channel coding/decoding, modulation, channel estimation and equalization. This kind of approach yields today’s efficient, versatile, and controllable wireless communication systems.

A conditional generative adversarial network (CGAN) was applied in [20] to construct an end-to-end wireless communication system with unknown channel conditions. The encoded signal for transmitting was treated as condition information, and the transmitter and receiver of the wireless communication system were each replaced by a DNN. CGAN acted as a bridge between the transmitter and the receiver, allowing backpropagation to proceed smoothly, thereby jointly training and optimizing both the transmitter and receiver DNNs.

Channel estimation and compression sensing are key technologies for the real-time implementation of wireless communication systems. Channel estimation is the process of estimating the parameters of a certain channel model from the received data, while compression sensing is a technique to acquire and reconstruct sparse or compressible signals. Deep learning-based channel estimation and compression sensing methods have been suggested in several recent works. To tackle the challenge of channel estimation when the
receiver is equipped with a limited number of radio frequency (RF) chains in massive MIMO systems, a learned denoising-based approximate message passing (LDAMP)network was exploited in [27], where the channel structure can be learned and estimated from a large amount of training data. Experiment results demonstrated that the LDAMP network significantly outperforms state-of-the art compressed sensing-based algorithms. Motivated by the covariance matrix structure, a deep learning-based channel estimator was proposed in [28], where the estimated channel vector was a conditional Gaussian random variable, and the covariance matrix was random. Assisted by CNN and the minimum mean squared
error (MMSE) estimator, the proposed channel estimator can ensure the state-of-the-art accuracy of channel estimation at a very lower computational complexity.

The basic architecture of deep learning-based CSI feedback is as shown in Fig. 2. Recently, more and more researchers have focused on the benefits of CSI feedback that the transmitter can utilize it to precode the signals
before the transmission, thus we can gain the improvement of MIMO systems. The precoding technique can help to realize the high quality of restoring signals and are widely adopted in wireless communication systems. By exploiting CSI, the MIMO system can substantially reduce multi-user (MU) interference and provide a multifold increase in cell throughput. In the network of frequency division duplex (FDD) or time division duplex (TDD), the receiver UE can estimate the downlink CSI and transmit it back to the BS once they obtain it and help BS to perform precoding for the next signal. BS can also obtain the uplink CSI to help rectify the transmission at UE. 

The procedure of CSI feedback transmitting has drawn much attention, since high quality reconstructed CSI received by BS guarantees a good precoding, improving the stability and efficiency of the MIMO system. Inspired by traditional compressed sensing technologies, a new CNN-based CSI sensing and recovery mechanism called CsiNet was proposed in [29], which effectively used the feedback information of training samples to sense and recover CSI, and achieved the potential benefits of a massive MIMO. The encoder of CsiNet converted the original CSI matrix into a codebook using CNN, and then the decoder restored the received codebook to the original CSI signal using the fullyconnected network and refine networks.

As shown in Fig. 3, a novel effective CSI sensing and recovery mechanism in the FDD MIMO system was proposed in our previous work [32], referred to as ConvlstmCsiNet, which takes advantage of the memory characteristic of RNN in modules of feature extraction, compression and decompression, respectively. Moreover, we adopt depthwise separable convolutions in feature recovery to reduce the size of the model and interact information between channels. The feature extraction module is also elaborately devised by studying decoupled
spatio-temporal feature representations in different structures.